HIGHER EDUCATION COMMISSION
Government of Pakistan, Islamabad
Sector H-9
Islamabad, Pakistan
Phone : +92-51-90402100
www.hec.gov.pk
adhussain@hec.gov.pk
Director General No. 5-4/HEC/NCRC/Law/2025/7695
Academics & Curriculum Division July 10, 2025
SUBJECT: REVISED CURRICULUM OF LLB FOUR YEAR DEGREE PROGRAM
The Higher Education Commission (HEC) of Pakistan, as mandated by its law, provides
guidance to Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) on curricula for tertiary education levels in alignment with the
National Qualifications Framework (NQF). As part of ongoing efforts to align legal education with international
best practices and to enhance its quality and relevance, the HEC has streamlined the LLB program to a 4-year
duration after series of consultative meetings with all stakeholders. The revised curriculum and updated standards
are aligned with HEC’s Undergraduate Education Policy V 1.1 (2023) and Graduate Education Policy (2023),
ensuring coherence with national priorities and adherence to international benchmarks after taking onboard the
Pakistan Bar Council (PBC), Directorate of Legal Education (DLE) and having endorsed by Constitutional
Bench of the Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan.
2. The revised curriculum of LLB, incorporating option for advanced electives (06) is hereby
notified. Universities offering the program are advised to align their curriculum with these updated standards as a
minimum requirement. Additionally, the respective departments must develop course content in accordance
with the prescribed framework, intended Program Learning Outcomes (PLOs) and Course Learning Outcomes
(CLOs) mentioned in the document. The finalized course content should be submitted electronically to this
office at the earliest. An electronic copy of the revised curriculum is available on HEC’s official website. The
revised curriculum is effective from Fall – 2025.
DR. AMJAD HUSSAIN
Vice Chancellors/Rectors/Heads
All Public/Private Sector Universities/DAIs
Copy for information to:
i. ES to Chairman, Higher Education Commission, Islamabad
ii. ES to Executive Director, Higher Education Commission, Islamabad
iii. Director, Directorate of Legal Education Supreme Court Building, Islamabad
iv. Secretary, Pakistan Bar Council, Supreme Court Building, Islamabad
v. PS to Consultant, Quality Assurance, Higher Education Commission, Islamabad
vi. PS to Managing Director, NAHE, Higher Education Commission, Islamabad
vii. PS to Advisor, Human Resource Development Division, Higher Education Commission, Islamabad
viii. PS to Director General, Academics Division, Higher Education Commission, Islamabad
ix. PS to Director General, A&A Division, Higher Education Commission, Islamabad
x. PS to Director General, Higher Education Commission, Regional Centers in Karachi, Lahore,
Peshawar & Quetta
xi. Director, Academics Division, Higher Education Commission, Islamabad
xii. Director / In-charge, Higher Education Data Repository, Higher Education Commission, Islamabad
xiii. Director / In-charge, Quality Assurance Agency, Higher Education Commission, Islamabad

-- 1 of 26 --

HIG HER
EDUC ATIO N
COMMISSION
CURRICULUM
FOR
BACHELOR OF LAWS
(LLB)
(2025)
HIGHER EDUCATION COMMISSION
ISLAMABAD – PAKISTAN

-- 2 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
i
Prepared by:
Subject Experts
Different Universities
Facilitated by:
Mr. Hidayatullah Kasi
Deputy Director, Academics Division
Higher Education Commission
Design, Composed and Edited by:
Mr. Tanveer Ali
IT Administrator, Academics Division
Higher Education Commission
Coordinated by:
Muhammad Naeem, Assistant, Academics Division
Higher Education Commission

-- 3 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Contributions iii
Preface-I iv
Preface-II v
Guiding Principles 1
Minimum standards 1
Course sequences, Titles & credits 1
Course learning outcomes 1
Course syllabus 1
General Education 1
Requirements of Field Experience/Internship 2
Requirements for Capstone Project 2
Bachelor of Laws (LLB) 3
Programme Description 3
Degree Nomenclature and Level 3
Program Learning Outcomes 3
Eligibility Criteria 3
Program Structure 3
Core Courses for LLB Programme 4
Scheme of Studies 5-7
Recommended list of Interdisciplinary courses 8
Clusters Of Electives for LLB Programme 8
Degree award requirements 10
Course Learning Outcomes (CLOs) 10-18
Guidelines 19

-- 4 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
iii
CONTRIBUTIONS
1. Mr. Muhammad Ahsan Bhoon, Member, Pakistan Bar Council, Islamabad
2. Mr. Hassan Raza Pasha, Member, Pakistan Bar Council, Islamabad
3. Barrister Usama Malik, Director, Directorate of Legal Education (DLE), Islamabad
4. Dr Aziz Ur Rehman, Professor, Director, School of Law, QAU, Islamabad
5. Dr. Muhammad Asim Iqbal, Professor, NUST Law School, Islamabad
6. Dr Muhammad Fayaz, Dean, Law School, Bahria University, Islamabad
7. Dr. Naeemullah Khan, Professor, Department of Law, University of Punjab
8. Dr Sohail Shahzad, Professor, Khyber Law College, Peshawar University, Peshawar
9. Dr Asmatullah Kakar, Principal University Law College, Balochistan University, Quetta
10. Dr Sadaf Aziz, Dean School of Law, Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS)
11. Dr Hadia Awan, Dean of Law University of Central Punjab, Lahore
12. Mr. Abdul Ghaffar Korai, Chairman, Department of Law, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto University of
Law, Karachi
13. Dr. Farida Anjum, Director (Curriculum), Higher Education Commission, Islamabad
14. Dr. Samza Fatima, Principal, University Law College, BZU Multan
15. Dr. Syed Raza Shah Gilani Chairperson/Assistant Professor, Department of Law, Abdul Wali
Khan University, Mardan
16. Dr. Rao Qasim Idrees, Chairperson, School of Law, University of Gujrat, Gujrat
17. Dr. Yasir Aleem, Principal, Law College, University of Sargodha
18. Mr. Hidayatullah Kasi, Deputy Director (Curriculum), Higher Education Commission,
Islamabad
19. Mr. Saqib Faraz, Deputy Director of Legal Education (DLE), Islamabad
20. Mr. Tanveer Ali, IT Administrator/NCRC Coordinator (Curriculum), Higher Education
Commission, Islamabad

-- 5 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
iv
PREFACE-I
The curriculum, with varying definitions, is said to be a plan of the teaching-learning process that
students of an academic program are required to undergo to achieve some specific objectives. It
includes a scheme of studies, objectives & learning outcomes, course contents, teaching
methodologies and assessment/ evaluation. Since knowledge in all disciplines and fields is expanding
at a fast pace and new disciplines are also emerging; it is imperative that curricula be developed and
revised accordingly.
Higher Education Commission, since its inception, has been involved in developing /revising the
curricula on periodic basis through National Curriculum Revision Committees (NCRCs) comprising
of eminent academics, researchers from HEC recognized universities/DAIs, professional councils,
R&D organizations of repute and industry professionals. So far, HEC has developed and revised
curricula of 150+ disciplines for undergraduate and graduate programs in various fields of Natural
Sciences, Applied Sciences, Social Sciences, Art & Humanities, Engineering & Technology, Medical,
Allied Health Sciences, Agriculture, Computing, Law, and Administration.
Over the period of time, labor markets in the world have substantially changed, hence, the demand
for workforce skills has also altered. Due to these transformations, there is a need to produce well-
rounded individuals who not only have the required knowledge base of specific discipline but also
possess the required skills to increase their market readiness for them to contribute to the overall
socio-economic development of the country. HEC has introduced the Undergraduate Education
Policy 2023, which provides an overarching framework for undergraduate programs. This curriculum
document is prepared in light of the UGE Policy 2023.
Dr. Amjad Hussain
Director General
Academics Division

-- 6 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
v
PREFACE-II
The official introduction of the reformed four-year LLB degree curriculum is a significant and
historic milestone in the legal education landscape of Pakistan.
This new curriculum is the result of a comprehensive review and consultative process aimed at
modernizing legal education to meet both national needs and international standards. The reduction
of the duration from five to four years was based on the proposal of the Pakistan Bar Council; the
apex regulatory body of lawyers together with its Directorate of Legal Education (DLE) along with
support from leading legal academics of the country including convenor of this National Curriculum
Review Committee on Law (NCRC), Dr. Aziz-ur-Rehman. The said proposal also got approval from
the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan as previously the Apex Court by virtue of
its judgment reported as 2019 SCMR,389 mandated a five-year LLB programme. This reduction in
the duration of the programme has been achieved while maintaining academic rigor and professional
competence, as we have taken a decisive step towards greater accessibility, relevance, and quality in
legal training.
The revised curriculum emphasizes interdisciplinary learning, practical legal skills, digital literacy, and
professional ethics. It also strengthens core areas such as constitutional law, criminal justice, civil
procedure, human rights, ADR and comparative legal systems. We have incorporated feedback from
legal educators, practicing lawyers and subject experts to ensure that our graduates are well-prepared
for the evolving demands of the legal profession.
This reform is not just about changing course structures; it is about nurturing a new generation of
lawyers who are critical thinkers, socially conscious, and committed to the rule of law. It is our
collective responsibility as institutions, educators, students and the legal community to embrace this
change and uphold the highest standards of legal education.
I extend my sincere appreciation to all those who contributed to this effort including all members of
the NCRC, the Federal Minister for Law & Justice Senator Azam Nazeer Tarar for his continued
support towards uplifting legal education in the country, Dr Mukhtar Ahmed, Chairman HEC
together with the entire team of HEC’s Academic Division and Syed Qalb-e-Hassan Shah, Chairman
Legal Education Committee, Pakistan Bar Council together with all learned Members of the PBC for
their continued patronage in this endeavor. Together, we are laying the foundation for a more
effective, inclusive, and future-ready legal system in Pakistan.
Barrister Usama Malik
Director
Directorate of Legal Education (DLE), PBC

-- 7 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
1
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Minimum Standards
The curriculum standards and guidelines prescribed under this policy are mandatory at minimum level.
Universities or the concerned departments may however set higher standards provided that the
standards prescribed herein are not reduced or compromised subject to the maximum credit hour
limit.
Course Sequence, Titles and Credits
For Bachelor of Laws (LLB), the sequence of courses prescribed under this document is logically
arranged and is suggestive only. The offering department may rearrange the sequence and alter the
course titles and credits provided that the essence of the courses prescribed in policy remains intact.
The department may add more courses as and when required subject to approval of university’s
relevant statutory body.
Course Learning Outcomes
Course learning outcomes (CLOs) are the bare minimum standards of learning that students must
achieve upon completing a specific course. These outcomes serve as essential benchmarks, ensuring
consistency in the quality of education across institutions. The CLOs prescribed herein represent the
minimum level of competency and understanding expected from students. While these standards must
not be compromised, departments are encouraged to enhance the rigor of the CLOs by incorporating
additional learning outcomes, provided these do not alter the essence of the prescribed standards. In
this policy, CLOs are exclusively developed for major field courses within the program. For
interdisciplinary courses, departments offering these courses are responsible for developing their
CLOs in alignment with their respective disciplines and program requirements. Moreover, CLOs for
elective courses are not prescribed here, as these are advanced or specialized courses. The
development of CLOs for electives is the responsibility of the respective departments, taking into
account the course's advanced nature and relevance to the program. For general education courses as
required under the HEC Undergraduate Education Policy V 1.1., departments may adopt the CLOs
prescribed in the HEC-developed model courses.
Course Syllabus
This document serves as a comprehensive guideline describing the course learning outcomes (CLOs)
for each course offered in the Bachelor of Laws (LLB) as minimum standards. The offering
department is mandated to meticulously prepare, modify, and tailor the syllabus of each course,
ensuring alignment with the stipulated learning outcomes. It is in this regard imperative that the
department utilizes instructional, reference, and reading materials that it deems appropriate to
effectively meet the CLOs.
General Education
For Bachelor of Laws (LLB), the courses prescribed for General Education component must
mandatorily be offered with the same titles and credits as prescribed under HEC Undergraduate
Education Policy V 1.1. The concerned departments may adopt and follow the learning outcomes and
study contents developed by HEC for these courses as available on its website.

-- 8 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
2
Requirement of Field Experience / Internship
It is a mandatory degree award requirement of three (03) credit hours Bachelor of Laws (LLB).
Internship of six (06) to eight (08) weeks (preferably undertaken during semester or summer break)
must be graded by a faculty member in collaboration with the supervisor in the field. This requirement
cannot be substituted with additional course work, capstone or project work.
Requirement of Capstone Project
It is a mandatory degree award requirement of three (03) credit hours for Bachelor of Laws (LLB). A
capstone project is multifaceted body of work that serves as a culminating academic and intellectual
experience for students. The capstone project must be supervised and graded by a faculty member as
per the protocols prescribed by the concerned department. This requirement cannot be substituted
with additional course work or internship.

-- 9 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
3
BACHELOR OF LAWS (LLB)
PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
There was a dire need to revamp the existing 5-year LLB Programme and to bring it in line with
international best practices and the HEC Undergraduate Education Policy V 1.1. In this regard, the
Pakistan Bar Council together with its Directorate of Legal Education (DLE) proposed the reduction
of LLB degree from five to four years to align it with all other undergraduate degrees in Pakistan and
make it more competitive. The new four-year LLB Programme is a comprehensive undergraduate
degree designed to equip students with a strong foundation in legal principles, critical thinking, and
practical skills necessary for a successful career in law. Combining theoretical knowledge with hands-
on learning, the curriculum covers core areas such as Constitutional Law, Criminal Law, Contract Law,
Property Law, and Legal Ethics, alongside specialized electives and clinical legal education as one of
its seminal features. The programme emphasizes research, advocacy, and legal writing, preparing
graduates to pursue careers as legal practitioners, judges, academics and policy makers, or to further
their studies in advanced areas of law.
DEGREE NOMENCLATURE AND LEVEL
The degree shall have the title of “Bachelor of Laws (LLB)” and level 6 of the National Qualifications
Framework of the HEC).
PROGRAMME LEARNING OUTCOMES (PLOs)
By the end of a degree in Bachelor of Laws (LLB), a graduate shall be able to:
• Demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of fundamental legal principles, doctrines, and the
structure of legal systems, both national and international.
• Effectively communicate legal concepts through oral and written forms, including legal drafting,
argumentation, and advocacy in both academic and professional settings.
• Demonstrate proficiency in practical legal skills such as client interviewing, negotiation, dispute
resolution, and litigation through experiential learning opportunities like moot courts, internships,
and legal clinics.
• Exhibit a strong commitment to ethical practices, professional responsibility, and social justice,
recognizing the lawyers’ role in upholding the rule of law and serving the public interest.
• Conduct effective legal research using primary and secondary sources and apply critical thinking
and analytical skills to interpret laws, identify issues, and develop well-reasoned legal arguments.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
Higher Secondary School Certificate/A-levels (involving 12 years of schooling) or an IBCC equivalent
qualification with minimum 45% marks is the eligibility requirement for admission in the LLB
Programme. 50% score in Law Admission Test (LAT) conducted by ETC-HEC is mandatory.
PROGRAMME STRUCTURE
The LLB programme follows HEC Undergraduate Education Policy 2023 V 1.1 provisions and
comprises a minimum of 08 regular semesters (Four Years). Universities may offer courses consisting

-- 10 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
4
of a maximum of 148 credit hours provided that the total number of credit hours are reasonably set
to achieve the desired Programme Learning Outcomes.
Minimum Credit Hours 146
General Education Courses 35 credit hours (14 courses)
Discipline Related Courses / Major
93 credit hours (31 Courses)
75 credit hours (25 Core Courses)
18 credit hours Specialization Elective (06 Courses)
Interdisciplinary/ Allied Courses 12 credit hours (04 courses)
Field Experience/Internship 03 credit hours
Capstone Project 03 credit hours
Program Duration
Minimum: 4 Years
Maximum: 6 Years
(Further extendable to another year subject to the
approval of the university's statutory body
following the provisions of HEC Undergraduate
Education Policy 2023 V 1.1)
Semester Duration
16-18 weeks for regular semesters
(1-2 weeks for examination)
8-9 weeks for summer semesters
(1 week for examination)
Course Load (per semester)
15-18 credit hours for regular semesters
Up to 8 credit hours for summer semesters
(For remedial/deficiency/failure/repetition
courses only)
3 Credit Hours (Theory)
3 classes (1 hour each) OR 2 classes (1.5 hours
each) OR 1 class (3 hours) per week throughout
the semester.
1 Credit Hours (Practical Work) 1 Credit hour of practical work requires three
contact hours per week throughout the semester.
CORE COURSES FOR LLB PROGRAMME: 25 COURSES - 75 CREDITS
1. Introduction to Law and Legal Systems
2. Principles of Constitutional Law
3. Criminal Law
4. Law of Contract
5. Law of Torts
6. Islamic Jurisprudence
7. Jurisprudence
8. Law of Evidence
9. Civil Procedure Code-I
10. Civil Procedure Code-II

-- 11 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
5
11. Criminal Procedure Code-I
12. Criminal Procedure Code-II
13. Law of Property
14. Equity, Trusts and Specific Relief
15. Law of Business Organizations -I
16. Law of Business Organizations -II
17. Administrative and Services Law
18. International Law
19. Legal Drafting and Pleadings
20. Legal Ethics and Moot Cases
21. Land Law
22. Islamic Personal Law-I
23. Islamic Personal Law- II
24. Environmental Law
25. Cyber Law
SCHEME OF STUDIES
The standard scheme of studies for LLB is given as under:
SEMESTER I
S. No COURSE CREDIT
HOURS CATEGORY
1 Quantitative Reasoning-I* 3 (3-0) General Education
2 Functional English* 3 (3-0) General Education
3 Applications of Information and Communication
Technologies* 3 (3-0) General Education
4 Introduction to Law and Legal Systems 3 (3-0) Major
5 Pakistan Studies* 2 (2-0) General Education
6 IDS-I 3 (3-0) Interdisciplinary
Total Credits (17)
SEMESTER II
S. No COURSE CREDIT
HOURS CATEGORY
1 Quantitative Reasoning-II* 3 (3-0) General Education
2 Social Science ** 2 (2-0) General Education
3 Expository Writing** 3 (3-0) General Education
4 Natural Science**
(Environmental Sciences & Law) 3 (2-1) General Education
5 Law of Torts 3 (3-0) Major
6 Fehm-e-Quran – I (for Muslim Students) 01(0-1) General Education
7 Criminal Law 3 (3-0) Major
Total Credits (18)

-- 12 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
6
SEMESTER III
S. No COURSE CREDIT
HOURS CATEGORY
1 Arts and Humanities** 2 (2-0) General Education
2 Islamic Studies (Religious Education / Ethics for
non-Muslim students) * 2 (2-0) General Education
3 Fehm-e-Quran – II (for Muslim Students) 01(0-1) General Education
4 Law of Contract 3 (3-0) Major
5 Jurisprudence 3 (3-0) Major
6 Principles of Constitutional Law 3 (3-0) Major
7 IDS-II 3 (3-0) Interdisciplinary
Total Credits (17)
SEMESTER IV
S. No COURSE CREDIT
HOURS CATEGORY
1 Civics and Community Engagement* 2 (2-0) General Education
2 Constitutional Law of Pakistan (Ideology and
Constitution of Pakistan) 3 (3-0) General Education
3 Entrepreneurship* 2 (2-0) General Education
4 Equity, Trusts and Specific Relief 3 (3-0) Major
5 Law of Property 3 (3-0) Major
6 Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) 3 (3-0) Interdisciplinary
7 Islamic Jurisprudence 3 (3-0) Major
Total Credits (19)
SEMESTER V
S. No COURSE CREDIT
HOURS CATEGORY
1 Islamic Personal Law-I 3 (3-0) Major
2 Law of Business Organizations -I 3 (3-0) Major
3 Law of Evidence 3 (3-0) Major
4 Administrative and Services Law 3 (3-0) Major
5 Land Law 3 (3-0) Major
6 Cyber Law 3 (3-0) Major
Total Credits (18)

-- 13 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
7
SEMESTER VI
S. No COURSE CREDIT
HOURS CATEGORY
1 Islamic Personal Law- II 3 (3-0) Major
2 Law of Business Organizations -II 3 (3-0) Major
3 Legal Drafting and Pleadings 3 (3-0) Major
4 International Law 3 (3-0) Major
5 Elective-I*** 3 (3-0) Major
6 Elective-II*** 3 (3-0) Major
Total Credits (18)
SEMESTER VII
S. No COURSE CREDIT
HOURS CATEGORY
1 Legal Ethics and Moot Cases 3 (3-0) Major
2 Criminal Procedure Code-I 3 (3-0) Major
3 Civil Procedure Code-I 3 (3-0) Major
4 Research Methodology 3 (3-0) Interdisciplinary
5 Elective-III*** 3 (3-0) Major
6 Elective-IV*** 3 (3-0) Major
Total Credits (18)
SEMESTER VIII
S. No COURSE CREDIT
HOURS CATEGORY
1 Criminal Procedure Code-II 3 (3-0) Major
2 Civil Procedure Code-II 3 (3-0) Major
3 Environmental Law 3 (3-0) Major
4 Elective-V*** 3 (3-0) Major
5 Elective-VI*** 3 (3-0) Major
6 Capstone Project 3 (3-0) Capstone Project
Total Credits (18)
Note: (i) Internships of three (03) credit hours must be completed in accordance with HEC
Undergraduate Education Policy V 1.1. This requirement cannot be substituted with
additional coursework, capstone, research, or project work.
* The university may use HEC-designed model courses.

-- 14 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
8
** The university/offering department may offer any course within the broader subject
domain/cluster to meet the given credits.
*** The university/offering department may offer any advanced course in LLB as an
elective based on available academic and physical resources, depending on its
geographical location and the programme learning objectives.
(ii) Non-Muslim students shall opt for a two-credit hour course from interdisciplinary
courses as a substitute requirement for Fehm-e-Quran courses compulsory for Muslim
students.
RECOMMENDED LIST OF INTERDISCIPLINARY COURSES:
Students may opt interdisciplinary courses from the following list where required in the scheme of
studies for LLB programme, to complement their holistic understanding of the major, provided that
the same is allowed by the admitting department. The list provided here is a recommended one only,
and the offering department may add more courses as and when needed, provided that the same is
approved by the university’s relevant statutory body.
• Economics
• Sociology
• Psychology
• Political Science
• Gender Studies
• Media
• Public Policy
• History
• Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) – Mandatory as recommended by NCRC
• Research Methodology- Mandatory as recommended by NCRC
CLUSTERS OF ELECTIVES FOR LLB PROGRAMME - 18 CREDITS (06
ELECTIVES TO BE CHOSEN)
Technology & Law
1. Data Protection & Privacy Law
2. Artificial Intelligence and Law
3. Digital Forensics and Electronic Evidence
4. Blockchain and Legal Implications
5. Intellectual Property in the Digital Age
6. Telecommunication Law
7. Legal Tech and Law Practice Automation
8. FinTech and Law
9. Media Law
Business & Commercial Law
1. Corporate Law
2. Mergers and Acquisitions

-- 15 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
9
3. Banking, Securities & Capital Markets Regulation
4. Insurance Law
5. Taxation Law
6. Custom and Tariff Laws
7. International Trade Law & E-commerce
8. Start-up Law & Legal Compliance
9. Competition & Consumer Law
10. Consumer Protection Law
11. Islamic Commercial Law
12. Intellectual Property Law
13. International Trade Law
14. International Economic Law
Human Rights & Social Justice
1. International Human Rights Law
2. Refugee and Migration Law
3. Gender Justice and Law
4. Disability Rights Law
5. Law and Social Movements
6. Labour Law
7. Public Interest Litigation
8. Law and Society
9. International Humanitarian Law (IHL)
10. Juvenile and Social Justice Law
Environment & Climate Justice
1. Climate Change Law
2. Sustainable Development & Environmental Justice
3. Water Law and Policy
4. Energy Law
5. Environmental Governance and Policy
6. Law of the Sea and Ocean Governance
7. Disaster Law and Climate Resilience
Constitutional Law and Governance
1. Comparative Constitutional Law
2. Law and Public Policy
3. Transitional Justice
4. Election Law
5. Immigration and Nationality Law
6. Decentralization and Federalism Law
Legal Ethics & Skills
1. Legal Writing and Research in the Digital Era
2. Legal Clinics

-- 16 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
10
3. Professional Ethics (including Technology Focus)
4. Mooting, Advocacy, and Drafting (Practical Modules)
5. Corporate Compliance and Ethics
6. Publication Ethics
7. Ethics in ADR and Litigation
Emerging and Specialized Legal Fields / Niche and Frontier Areas of Law
1. Space Law
2. Sports Law
3. Biotechnology and Law
4. Health Law & Bioethics
5. Medical and Forensic Law
6. Law and Development
7. Maritime, Shipping, and Admiralty Law
DEGREE AWARD REQUIREMENTS
The following minimum requirements are prescribed for the award of Bachelor of Laws (LLB)
qualification:
a) All courses in the General Education category must be completed as prescribed by HEC
Undergraduate Policy 2023 V 1.1.
b) As prescribed in this document as per recommendation of the NCRC, 146 credit hours must
be completed in a minimum of 08 semesters spread over a minimum of four years.
c) The capstone project (03 credit hours) must be completed following HEC-prescribed
guidelines for the degree award. This requirement cannot be substituted with additional
coursework.
d) Internships of three (03) credit hours must be completed in accordance with HEC
Undergraduate Education Policy V 1.1. This requirement cannot be substituted with additional
coursework, capstone, research, or project work.
e) CGPA must not be below 2.00/4.00 at the completion of the degree programme. The
university may, however, set a higher standard in this regard.
COURSE LEARNING OUTCOMES (CLOs)
(Arranged in Alphabetical Order)
Administrative and Services Law
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the core principles of administrative law, including natural justice,
delegated legislation, and judicial review.
• Comprehend knowledge of key service laws in Pakistan, including the Civil Servants Act, 1973,
E&D Rules, and related constitutional provisions.
• Critically analyze the judicial remedies, ouster clauses, and doctrines such as ultra vires and
promissory estoppel in administrative governance.

-- 17 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
11
• Apply administrative and service law principles to real-life cases involving writ jurisdiction,
public service disputes, and tribunal procedures.
Alternate Dispute Resolution
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the significance and types of dispute resolution methods alternative to
formal court systems.
• Comprehend the skills, procedures, and techniques involved in negotiation, mediation,
conciliation, and arbitration.
• Critically analyze the laws, research, and case studies on ADR to improve justice delivery
mechanisms.
• Apply appropriate ADR techniques to effectively resolve disputes in real or simulated settings.
Criminal Law
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the core principles of criminal liability, including actus reus, mens rea,
general defenses, and classifications of offenses under PPC 1860.
• Comprehend knowledge of major criminal offenses, punishments, and Islamic criminal law
principles, including crime types, intent, and liability.
• Critically analyze the judicial interpretations, statutory provisions, and distinctions among
criminal acts such as theft, abduction, and defamation.
• Apply criminal law doctrines to real-life scenarios involving investigation, charging, and legal
evaluation of offenses under the PPC and Islamic law.
Cyber Law
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the evolution, scope, and categories of cybercrimes, including recent
legislative amendments in Pakistan.
• Comprehend knowledge of key cyber laws such as PECA 2016 and its 2025 amendments,
focusing on offenses, penalties, and regulatory frameworks.
• Critically analyze the implications of cyber laws on freedom of expression, privacy rights, and
the balance between security and civil liberties.
• Apply cyber law principles to real-world scenarios, including case studies on cyber offenses,
digital evidence handling, and regulatory compliance.
Civil Procedure Code-I
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the structure and foundational provisions of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, including jurisdiction, institution of suits, and issuance of summons.
• Comprehend procedural rules on pleadings, appearance of parties, framing of issues, and the
trial process.

-- 18 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
12
• Critically analyze the fairness and efficiency of civil proceedings with reference to case law and
reform initiatives.
• Apply civil procedure rules to draft pleadings, frame issues, and prepare trial strategies in
practical scenarios.
Civil Procedure Code-II
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the structure and foundational provisions of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, including jurisdiction, institution of suits, and issuance of summons.
• Comprehend procedural rules on pleadings, appearance of parties, framing of issues, and the
trial process.
• Critically analyze the fairness and efficiency of civil proceedings with reference to case law and
reform initiatives.
• Apply civil procedure rules to draft pleadings, frame issues, and prepare trial strategies in
practical scenarios.
Criminal Procedure Code-I
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the foundational provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,
including courts, powers and procedural stages.
• Comprehend the legal processes relating to arrest, investigation, unlawful assemblies, public
nuisance and pre-trial mechanisms.
• Critically analyze the Pakistan’s criminal procedure in comparison with English and inquisitorial
systems, focusing on the right to fair trial.
• Apply procedural knowledge to assess criminal proceedings, FIR registration, inquiries and pre-
challan practices in legal or clinical settings.
Criminal Procedure Code-II
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the procedural framework of criminal trials, charges, evidence, bail,
appeals and case disposal under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.
• Comprehend the role of medical jurisprudence in criminal trials, including medico-legal
evidence and post-mortem procedures.
• Critically analyze the right to fair trial and comparing procedural practices in Pakistan with
English and inquisitorial legal systems.
• Apply procedural and evidentiary principles in evaluating criminal cases and medico-legal
scenarios in court or clinical legal settings.
Constitutional Law of Pakistan (Ideology and Constitution of Pakistan)
By the end of this course, students will be able to:

-- 19 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
13
• Identify and understand the ideological foundations of Pakistan, including the Two-Nation
Theory and Muslim nationalism, as responses to colonial rule and as part of broader anti-
colonial movements in the Sub-continent.
• Comprehend the structure, features, and guiding principles of the Constitution of Pakistan,
1973, including federalism, separation of powers, and fundamental rights.
• Critically analyze the constitutional developments, major amendments, and landmark
judgments interpreting the 1973 Constitution.
• Apply constitutional provisions and case law to assess legal questions relating to state
institutions, citizen rights, and governance under the 1973 Constitution.
Equity, Trusts and Specific Relief
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the historical development, maxims and core principles of equity, trust
law and specific relief.
• Comprehend key doctrines and legal procedures under the Specific Relief Act 1877, Trust laws,
waqf laws and comparative equity in Islam.
• Critically analyze the relevance and evolution of equitable principles in modern legal systems,
including Pakistani and Islamic contexts.
• Apply equitable doctrines and remedies to practical cases involving trust, waqf, injunctions and
specific performance.
Environmental Law
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the evolution, sources, and principles of international and Pakistani
environmental law.
• Comprehend awareness of global and domestic legal frameworks for environmental
governance, including the Pakistan Environmental Protection Act, 1997.
• Critically analyze the role of international courts, soft law, and landmark judgments in shaping
environmental jurisprudence.
• Apply environmental law principles and legal remedies to real-world cases, including judicial
decisions like Shehla Zia v WAPDA and international cases such as Lopez Ostra v Spain.
Introduction To Law and Legal Systems
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the origins, classifications, and sources of law within historical and
modern legal systems.
• Comprehend knowledge of the relationship between law and ethics, religion, morality, and its
institutional application in Pakistan.
• Critically analyze the role of legal systems, fundamental rights, and rule of law in shaping state-
citizen relations.
• Apply foundational legal concepts to real-life scenarios involving legal interpretation, case law,
and court processes.

-- 20 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
14
Islamic Jurisprudence
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the historical development and primary sources of Islamic
Jurisprudence, including the Qur’an, Sunnah, Ijma and Qiyas.
• Comprehend key legal concepts such as rights, obligations, legal capacity, contracts and court
procedures in Islamic law.
• Critically analyze the Islamic legal schools, reasoning methods, and their application in modern
constitutional and international contexts.
• Apply Islamic legal principles to interpret sources, resolve disputes and evaluate legal issues in
practical settings.
International Law
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the scope, nature, and general principles of International Law.
• Comprehend important notions in International Law surrounded by state, organizations,
society, and individuals.
• Critically analyze the instrumental role of International Law in international disputes, alliances,
and global cooperation.
• Apply and recommend the most suitable/correct course of action to help resolve an
international dispute.
Islamic Personal Law-I
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the principles and Islamic Law governing conjugal/matrimonial life,
such as – marriage, dower, divorce etc. - of a Muslim.
• Comprehend and demonstrating knowledge of the Islamic Laws on matrimonial matters.
• Critically analyze the Islamic Personal Law to adapt to the needs of the transforming society in
the Muslim context.
• Apply the knowledge and skills of Islamic Personal Law in legal practice/mediation to provide
relief to the aggrieved party.
Islamic Personal Law- II
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the Islamic Personal Law governing property of a deceased Muslim;
their Gift, Will and Waqf and its legal consequences.
• Comprehend the knowledge of Islamic Law of Inheritance including transfer of property
through Gift, Will and Waqf and its implementation.
• Critically analyze the different perspectives and approaches to Islamic Law, including the
different school of thoughts and the role of contemporary scholars to meeting the needs of the
contemporary Muslim society.
• Apply the knowledge and skills of Islamic Law of Inheritance in legal practice/mediation
process to provide relief to the aggrieved party.

-- 21 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
15
Jurisprudence
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the major jurisprudential schools including natural law, positivism,
realism, and sociological theories.
• Comprehend the philosophical foundations of legal systems through the work of major jurists
and theorists.
• Critically analyze the interplay between law, morality, justice, and social change using
contemporary debates and theories.
• Apply jurisprudential theories to interpret statutes, judicial decisions, and legal principles in their
ethical and socio-political context.
Law Of Contract
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the core principles of the Law of Contract in Pakistan under the
Contract Act, 1872, including offer, acceptance, consideration, and free consent.
• Comprehend the legal requirements for contract formation, performance, discharge, and
remedies for breach.
• Critically analyze the contractual doctrines through case law and international comparisons to
assess enforceability and fairness.
• Apply contract law principles to draft agreements, evaluate breaches, and advise on remedies in
real-life and hypothetical disputes.
Law Of Torts
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the general principles of Law of Torts.
• Comprehend important torts against persons and properties.
• Critically analyze the role of intention & negligence surrounding torts against persons and
properties.
• Apply the most suitable/correct course of action in a dispute before a civil court/mediation
system.
Law Of Evidence
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the foundational principles of the Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984,
including relevancy, admissibility and types of evidence.
• Comprehend key rules on witnesses, burden of proof, privileged communication, estoppel and
examination processes in criminal and civil cases.
• Critically analyze the admissibility of modern evidence, judicial interpretation and evolving
trends in Pakistan’s evidence law.
• Apply evidentiary principles in assessing legal disputes, evaluating witness credibility and
interpreting facts in trial and pre-trial settings.

-- 22 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
16
Law Of Property
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand key concepts and classifications of property, transfer methods and core
provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
• Comprehend the laws relating to sale, mortgage, lease, gift, exchange, actionable claims and
mandatory/optional registration under the Registration Act, 1908.
• Critically analyze the rights and liabilities of parties involved in property transactions and assess
judicial interpretations and legislative developments.
• Apply legal knowledge to evaluate property disputes, draft compliant transactions, and advise
on issues arising from immovable property dealings.
Legal Drafting and Pleadings
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the working knowledge of the rules and conventions governing legal
drafting in Pakistan.
• Comprehend the core principles of legal drafting, including clarity, precision, and consistency.
Also analyze and interpret legal documents to identify key provisions and their implications.
Evaluate and revise legal documents to ensure accuracy, coherence, and compliance with
relevant laws and regulations.
• Critically analyze the scenarios in light of the prevalent laws to write effective documents for
the court/mediation system.
• Apply legal drafting & pleading skills for better understanding of
judges/mediators/lawyers/clients.
• Equip students with the basic knowledge and skills required for drafting and pleadings in Urdu
language.
Legal Ethics and Moot Cases
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the ethical responsibilities of legal professionals, judicial conduct, and
professional codes of behavior.
• Comprehend legal skills in advocacy, client counselling, drafting, e-filing, and alternative dispute
resolution processes.
• Critically analyze the legal dilemmas, courtroom scenarios, and access to justice challenges
through roleplays, case studies, and mock trials.
• Apply ethical standards and courtroom procedures in moot courts and simulations, reflecting
professional decorum and legal reasoning.
Land Law
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the basic concepts behind the Land Law applicable to agricultural land
in Pakistan.
• Comprehend the laws and procedures related to the collection of land revenue in Pakistan.

-- 23 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
17
• Critically analyze the Land Law (substantive & procedural) to further improve its operation and
governance through automation and digitization in Pakistan.
• Apply legal skills to adopt the right course of action providing relief to the aggrieved party in
Pakistan.
Law Of Business Organizations -I
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• possess knowledge of the basic philosophical and legal concepts of business organizations
including sole proprietorship, limited liability partnerships and general legal partnerships and
companies.
• comprehend and distinguish the legal frameworks relating to formation, governance including
the rights and duties of stakeholders and dissolution of the business organizations.
• critically analyze the specific legal provisions of relevant Acts relating to business organizations
in the light of modern legislative, judicial and socio business developments.
• apply legal principles by doctrinal and socio legal methods and to advise on legal issues to assess
the legal implications of laws of business organizations in hypothetical and real-world business
scenarios.
Law Of Business Organizations -II
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Possess knowledge of the basic philosophical and legal concepts of business organizations
including the separate legal personality and limited liability of corporate form of businesses.
• Comprehend the complete legal framework relating to formation including drafting of
constitutional documents, legal practices in corporate governance and finance and winding up
of companies.
• critically analyze the specific legal provisions of relevant corporate and securities Acts relating
to corporate organizations, financial markets and regulatory bodies considering the modern
legislative, judicial and socio legal developments.
• apply legal principles by doctrinal and socio legal methods and to advise on contemporary
corporate legal issues to assess the legal implications of corporate laws in hypothetical and real-
world business scenarios.
Principles Of Constitutional Law
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the foundations of constitutional design, structure, and the evolution
of constitutional formation across jurisdictions.
• Comprehend the doctrine and function of judicial review as a tool of constitutional
interpretation.
• Critically analyze comparative constitutional jurisprudence, highlighting key similarities and
divergences across legal systems.
• Apply constitutional principles and major Pakistani cases such as Maulvi Tamizuddin Khan,
Asma Jilani, and Sindh High Court Bar Association, to real-world constitutional contexts.

-- 24 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
18
Research Methodology
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
• Identify and understand the relationship amongst legal research methods, methodology, and
theory across law and allied disciplines.
• Comprehend doctrinal and non-doctrinal research methodologies and acquiring core research
skills for academic writing.
• Critically analyze existing literature using appropriate research approaches and frameworks.
• Apply legal research techniques to investigate, assess, and formulate evidence-based arguments
and recommendations.

-- 25 of 26 --

HEC CURRICULUM BOOKLET – LLB 2025
19
DECISIONS / GUIDING PRINCPLES
1. It is noteworthy that universities can redistribute courses across the semesters. This adjustment
can be made based on factors such as teaching staff availability and other facilities. The course
distribution outlined is not rigid and is subject to modification by the concerned universities.
2. The NCRC after thorough deliberation decided that no upper age limit be implemented for the
LLB programme.
3. After thorough deliberation, the members reached a consensus on implementing the Semester
System in affiliated colleges, in alignment with the Higher Education Commission’s (HEC)
Semester Guidelines and Institutional Affiliation Policy. The responsibility for conducting
semester final examinations and preparing results will be done by concerned universities in true
spirit of the affiliation policy to ensure consistency and quality of the programmes at all levels.
4. It was further discussed by the forum that few HEIs deny admissions in LLB programme on
the basis of sessional gap after completing 12 years qualification despite clearing LAT test. After
thorough discussions, it was decided that denying admission based on sessional gap is
unjustified. Hence any student who has completed 12 years qualification and having cleared
LAT test is eligible for admission in LLB programme irrespective of the age limit and any
sessional gap from completion of 12 years schooling since there is no bar in this regard under
the Pakistan Bar Council Legal Education Rules, 2015 as well.
5. It was revealed during the meeting that the mandatory course of ‘Ideology and Constitution of
Pakistan’ is being taught by faculty of social sciences. As the course and its contents are highly
relevant to the school of law, it was recommended that the course be taught only through Faculty
of Law to meet its intended purpose.
6. It has been decided by an overwhelming majority of members of NCRC that since the Apex
Court has granted approval to implement the four-year LLB programme, therefore in order to
ensure compliance with the directives of the Apex Court, all HEI’s and their affiliated colleges
are required to implement this revised scheme of studies and align their degree programs
accordingly, effective Fall 2025.
7. A minimum of 75% attendance is mandatory for students of HEI’s and their affiliated colleges
for the purposes of sitting in each semester’s final examination being conducted by the
concerned HEI.
8. The scheme/curriculum provided in this document is specific to 4-year LLB program, whereas
the programme of LLB (Shariya & Law) shall continue to be 5-year degree programme falling
under double major as per HEC Undergraduate Education policy 2023.

-- 26 of 26 --

